The Speech That Delights the Gentle Protector: A Sādhana of the Singular Hero Orange Mañjuśrī Arapacana Oṃ svasti siddhaṃ Supreme deity Mañjuśrī, your sacred wisdom light causes the lotus of intelligence to blossom. As I bow to you, I vow to compose The Speech That Delights the Gentle Protector, the pinnacle among such sādhanas. The energetic and qualified who have awakened their inner nature of caring love for the infinitude of sentient life should do this practice. The source of all defects, the principal cause that leads us to wander in this great ocean of suffering, is the belief in a self and all it entails. Think: "In order to remove that fixation through the opposing force of the extraordinary wisdom of realization of selflessness, I shall accomplish the profound gate of the samādhi and dhāraṇī of Ārya Mañjuśrī." With this attitude, first properly receive the permission blessing and keep the samaya commitment. Then, in a solitary hut that is pleasing and conducive to meditation, settle on a comfortable seat and practice the preparatory, main, and concluding sections. First, for the preparation, apply the various reflections that give rise to a mind of renunciation, compassion, and bodhicitta. In the sky in front, visualize the details of the field of refuge as if it were actually there. With one-pointed and undivided devotion, I and all sentient beings take refuge from now until enlightenment In the guru, Buddha, Dharma, and Saṅgha; The mere thought of whom dispels the fears of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. Recite this as much you can. At the end, the field of refuge dissolves into you. Arousing bodhicitta, repeat three times: As numerous as the sky is vast, sentient beings are held captive in saṃsāra By confusion and ignorance. To dispel this darkness with the supreme illumination of all-knowing wisdom, I shall practice the samādhi of the Solar Lord of Speech. May all sentient beings enjoy happiness, be free from suffering, Not be separated from happiness, and abide in equanimity. Through the fully sustaining elixir of these four immeasurables, May the lotus flower of their benefit and happiness always bloom! Thus, meditate on the four immeasurables. Second, for the main section, begin with samādhi meditation on the deity: All phenomena are from the very beginning beyond conceptual construction, Arising as the illusory display of dependent origination, Here, in my heart, within a light tent of empty luminosity, PAṂ manifests as a lotus flower and AḤ as a moon. Upon these arises a saffron-colored DHIḤ, which dispels mental darkness; Its light completely suffuses my body, which becomes pure like crystal. In that instant I am Lord Mañjuśrī, Appearing in the youthful form of a sixteen-year-old. My body is exceedingly clear, with a radiant hue of blazing gold. Handsome, attractive, in a majestic pose, Casting a sidelong gaze from wide-open eyes, I laugh gently as I smile. I sport a fivefold topknot, an utpala flower blossoming by my ear, flowing silks, And a luminous crown beautified with the Sugata. A compassionate hero, I lean against a moon disk, Wearing a variety of silks and jewels, all radiant with light. My right hand wields a sword of wisdom, the color of the sky; The left holds an utpala with a volume of scriptures upon its pistils. I am seated in the vajra posture upon a lotus-and-moon seat, And lights of many colors shine from my wisdom body, filling all of space. All this is visualized as rainbow-like, within the unity of appearance and emptiness. Chanting this, focus your mind one-pointedly on the luminous form of your body as the deity. If you tire of this, you can engage in the recitation that accomplishes the gate of dhāraṇīs. In my heart, upon a lotus and moon, and surrounding the syllable DHIḤ, The syllable OṂ leads the mantra A RA PA CA NA DHIḤ; There is another beautiful syllable DHIḤ on my tongue. In this way, the syllables are like a precious lamp, Perfectly and vividly blazing, whose light Completely dispels the mental darkness of sentient beings throughout space. Their two accumulations are fully completed, placing sentient beings on the level of Mañjuśrī Kumāra. The light rays invoke the buddhas and bodhisattvas, reminding them of their aspirations and prayers, And their wisdom of knowledge dissolves into me in the form of light rays. These cleanse the two beginningless obscurations and their habitual patterns. I enter into the state of knowing things as they are and all that exists, And the great treasury of memory, intellect, and confidence is opened. Visualizing thus, recite: OṂ A RA PA CA NA DHIḤ With an undistracted mind, recite as much as you can. If you wish, recite: NAMO MAÑJUŚRIYE KUMĀRABHŪTĀYA | BODHISATVĀYA MAHĀSATVĀYA MAHĀKARUṆIKĀYA | TADYATHĀ | OṂ ARAJE | VIRAJE | ŚUDDHE VIŚUDDHE | ŚODHAYA VIŚODHAYA | AMALE | VIMALE | NIRMALE | JAYAVARE | RURU CALE | HŪṂ HŪṂ HŪṂ PHAṬ PHAṬ PHAṬ SVĀHĀ This mantra develops the intellect of prajñā. Recite as appropriate. When concluding the session, focus on the DHIḤ at the tip of your tongue, and recite DHIḤ 108 times within a single breath. If you cannot do that, then recite DHIḤ that number of times at least without the interruption of other speech. Then, swallowing your saliva, imagine that the letter DHIḤ enters into you, and your body becomes a blazing orange DHIḤ. Meditating one-pointedly, engage in recitation of DHIḤ. Third is the concluding section. When arising from the session, think as follows: In an instant, I become Mañjuśrī Kumāra again . . . Make the following offerings with their respective mudrās. With the drinking water of the Lord of the Beautiful Mingled with this offering water of eightfold nectar, I moisten your lotus lips, Supreme Ārya. May your benevolence mature my compassion! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ ARGHAṂ PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ Unsullied by murkiness and impurity, With the cleansing stream of the Gaṅgā I cool the spokes of the cakras of your feet. May I rest in the ease of profound emptiness! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ PĀDYAṂ PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ Humbling the ladies of immortality With this fresh rain of many flowers, I take the opportunity to beautify your bejeweled hair. May I perfect the pāramitā of infinite generosity! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ PUṢPE PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ With an abundance of scents, natural and produced, Forming deliciously sweet billowing clouds, I offer these to delight the Gentle Protector. May I perfect the pure discipline that pleases the noble ones! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ DHŪPE PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ Casting sharp light that banishes darkness With precious lamps of the sun and moon, I offer the beauty that is present to your wisdom insight. May you grant the armor of immovable patience! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ ĀLOKE PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ Soothing and fresh like the cooling light of the youthful moon Are the perfumes of camphor, sandalwood, and saffron With which I anoint your body of vast merit. May you grant me the perseverance to cross the ocean of the dual accumulations! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ GANDHE PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ With an abundant variety of food and drink Superior even to the libations of the Lord of the Three Times, I bring delight to your lotus tongue. May all beings flourish through the sustenance of samādhi! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ NAIVEDYAM PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ With offering clouds of sweet sound, An ocean of the sixty seductive branches of melody, I awaken the three worlds from their sleep of ignorance. May I resoundingly sing the supreme melody of prajñā! OṂ ĀRYA MAÑJUŚRĪ ŚABDA PRATĪCCHA SVĀHĀ You can abbreviate this by chanting only the offering mantras. If you prefer greater elaboration, you can chant the Names of Mañjuśrī and profound praises by Lopön Dorje Tsöncha and the venerable Sakya Paṇḍita, as well as: You embody the wisdom of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas Collected together in a single aggregation. Adorned with the name Mañjuśrī. With faith, I shall here attempt to praise you. With your strength in perfecting The excellent actions of wisdom and love, You vanquish the extremes of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, Adorning the sun of the heart of enlightenment. However, to lead sentient beings In front of the jinas, as many as there are, In the manner of a great bodhisattva You manifest as the Solar Lord of Speech. Your body of crystalline purity Glows like fresh saffron; With an infinity of wonderful marks and signs, Nothing in saṃsāra compares to you. Your jewel speech is an instrument of many strings Playing sixty melodious tones; Applying it to all objects of knowledge, You diminish the arrogance of fame in the three worlds. You always transcend extremes. Having understood things as they are, You seduce with the understanding of things as they appear; You are the sole origin of the four noble ones. In summary, even if ten million learned ones praised you For the span of a hundred kalpas, They could not describe the slightest fraction Of your supreme, ocean-like qualities of abandoning and ripening. You show all sentient beings the path to the higher realms And sublime omniscience. Your activity is like the sky; Its end will not be seen in saṃsāra. Even the buddhas of the ten directions Have committed to praise you every day. E ma! Who could be untouched by devotion To your wondrous life? Therefore, I make offerings and pray to you With one-pointed devotion. Until I attain the heart of enlightenment, Build me a stairway of compassion. In the pleasure grove of discipline Is a lotus pond of great learning; Trees blossom with the beauty of reflection, Growing heavy with the fruits of meditation. On the great waters of the outer and inner sciences, The tides of exposition, debate, and composition Rise with a hundred nectar-like rays. May I become you, Lunar Lord of Speech! Above all, Gentle Protector, may I see your joyful face through accomplishing this profound vidyā mantra! May you continually bestow the sweet dew of your speech, and perfect the youth of my intelligence! Going beyond attachment to self and aggregates, may I attain the omniscience that knows the inseparability of emptiness and dependent origination! May I become a new omniscient wisdom light that brings excellence to the three worlds! Thus, supplicate with this praise. Alternatively, in a more abbreviated form, you may supplicate with the praise beginning "Possessing the body of a young man . . ."  By the merit of this, Having swiftly accomplished Mañjuśrī Kumāra, May I establish all beings without exception At that very level. Thus, with dedication and prayers, you should engage in the activities of postmeditation at all times. Never separating from the confidence of Mañjuśrī, you should train in uniting the two accumulations. When you practice approach recitation, maintain cleanliness and practice in four sessions. According to the supreme way of approach by means of signs in experiences or in dreams, you will hold a sword and an utpala flower. You will experience burning like fire, and you will see the sun and moon rise. Until such signs occur, you should endeavor in the practice. According to the intermediate way of recitation over time, you should practice this for six months. Finally, according to recitation by number, you should recite the mantra eight hundred thousand times, including the amendment practice. During this time, if in your dreams you perceive hail and howling black winds, the roar of wild animals, and so on, these are signs of minor obstacles. In that case, in between sessions you should practice the meditation and recitation of Wrathful Acala: Within the realm of emptiness, in an instant, upon a seat of lotus and sun, I am blue Acala, King of Wrath, my three eyes ablaze. My right hand wields a sword; my left holds a vajra lasso. I manifest within a mass of wisdom flames, my left knee on the ground; I am replete with all the wrathful attributes; in my heart, upon a lotus and sun, stands the syllable HŪṂ. Surrounding it is a mantra garland the color of the sky. As it revolves, it emanates a purifying storm of fierce sparks That incinerate all obstacles and adversity. OṂ CAṆḌA MAHĀROṢAṆA HŪṂ PHAṬ Recite this mantra one hundred times, one thousand times, and so forth. If you wish, practice the instruction of the Water Protector, which provides temporary pacification, or apply the dispelling of obstacles from any yidam deity practice. In this way, endeavoring one-pointedly, you will first have a mind of perfect retention. Then you will give birth in your mind to the abundant qualities of composing poetry, powerful vajra speech, and understanding the unmistaken meaning. Your memory and confidence will certainly increase like the rising ocean tides. I pray that this clear composition, This pinnacle sādhana of Arya Mañjuśrī, The Speech That Delights the Gentle Sakya Protector, May greatly increase the wisdom light of sentient beings. Thus, based on the main practice sādhanas of past masters, this composition was adorned by the learned renunciant Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo. By this virtue, may all beings acquire the supreme mind that distinguishes phenomena and thus swiftly proceed to reach the heart of enlightenment. Siddhirastu. Sarvadā kalyānaṃ bhavatu! 
